# Manifest2Nix.jl

A Nix library for creating offline and reproducible Julia builds.

Julia uses an [Ahead-Of-Time](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/devdocs/aot/)
compilation system. This means Julia generates native code for functions that it
can compile, while it still needs access to the source code in order to compile
just-in-time. Manifest2Nix.jl is designed to take advantage of this system by
precompiling as much code as possible.

## Usage

``` sh
nix flake new --template git+https://codeberg.org/aniva/Manifest2Nix.jl.git ./minimal
```

### Overlay

Before building any Julia library, there first has to be a Julia toolchain.
Generate a toolchain via one of 4 methods (in decreasing order of preference):

1. Use the `self.fromManifest path` overlay, which reads the version from a
   `Manifest.toml` file.
2. Use the `self.fromVersion version` overlay, e.g. `manifest2nix.fromVersion
   "1.11.7"`.
3. Use the provided `self.fromJuliaBin` overlay, which uses the `julia-bin`
   package. (`julia = julia-bin`)
4. `pkgs` comes with a default `julia` package. It may work or it may not work.
   This build of Julia could have problems on Darwin systems.

### Package Building

Once there is a fixed Julia version available as `pkgs.julia`, create the
`manifest2nix` library by calling the `mkLib` function:

```nix
m2nlib = manifest2nix.mkLib pkgs
```

In `m2nlib`, some functions are available for building Julia packages:

- `manifest2nix`: Tool for creating the `Lock.toml`. To create a `Lock.toml`
  file, execute at the root of a Julia project: (use `--up` to also update the
  manifest)

```sh
manifest2nix lock [--up] --project .
```

- `buildJuliaPackage { src, depots, deps, pre-exec ? "", env ? {} }`: Builds a
  Julia package with explicit dependencies. A Julia package in Nix is a special
  attrset generated by this function.

  If `pre-exec` is not null, it will run in Julia after precompilation to force
  Julia to generate more compiled code. Set `env` for environment variables.
- `buildJuliaPackageWithDeps { src, lockFile ? "${src}/Lock.toml", pre-exec ?
  "", override ? {}, env ? {} }`: Build a Julia package along with dependencies.
  If there are any path-tracking dependencies, they must be fed in as overrides.
  e.g. `override = { Artefact = ./artefact; }`. The targets of overrides can be
  either paths to sources or built Julia packages. Set `env` to provide
  environment variables.
- `stdlib-depot`: A Julia depot containing a precompiled version of Julia
  standard libraries.
- `mkDepsDepot { name, deps }`: Given a list of Julia packages, create a depot
  containing all of them. This depot can be cached to speed up compilation.
- `createEnv { package, workingDepot ? "" }`: Given a Julia package, create an
  environment (i.e.  set of variables) in which Julia can run and see the
  precompiled version of the given package. By default, the working depot here is
  the default path to the system depot. However, if this environment is then
  used in a Nix build, then `workingDepot` must be set to a writable path e.g.
  `.julia`. Not doing so can cause compilation failures.

### Caching

A Julia package has these attributes:
- `.compiled`: Precompiled binary code. Cache this in Nix to shorten the
  compilation of downstream packages.
- `.load-path`: A special derivation for making load paths. Each package
  `$PACKAGE`'s `load-path` is a derivation containing a single directory
  `$PACKAGE` which includes the project's source code. In most cases this is a
  direct link to the project's source directory. For legacy packages without a
  `Project.toml`, there will be a synthetic `Project.toml` file so Julia can
  find the package.
- `.artifacts`: An attribute set of all downloaded artifacts.

## Troubleshooting

If the SSL certificate in `nixpkgs` is too old, it may cause registry fetch
failures during package updates. This will manifest as "the identity of the
server ... could not be verified." In which case, update using Julia itself, or
update `nixpkgs`.

## Contributing

Use the provided flake `devShell`, and install pre-commit hooks:

``` sh
pre-commit install --install-hooks
```

### Updates

When there is a new Julia version, execute `nix run .#toolchain-fetch $VERSION`
to generate Nix attributes. Add these attributes to `sources.nix`. For minor
version updates, add a new Manifest/Lock pair to `version/`.
